Consider a database server for an application growing in demand. As the number of reads and writes coming in from the application begin to increase, the wait time for the queries to be processed by the server increases also.
One approach here is to scale the database vertically. Scaling vertically is increasing capacity by increasing the computing power of the database server.
Another approach is to scale horizontally. This means increasing capacity by distributing load across multiple servers. When we scale horizontally, we keep copies of our database on multiple servers (replication).
There are three main models of replication: single-leader, multi-leader, and leaderless. Single-leader replication involves a single database server handling incoming writes and then copying those changes into other servers, while multi-leader replication involves multiple servers receiving updates, leading to increased complexity. Leaderless replication uses a different approach altogether that does not require leaders in this sense.
Here, we will focus on the single-leader model of replication. In this model, the follower database server is a read replica: a copy of the database from which data may only be read. The leader server is designated to process writes to the database.
Once the leader processes a write request, it could wait for the followers to replicate changes before doing anything else. This is called synchronous replication. While this ensures the database is always consistent, it may be too slow in responding to queries. In applications like finance or healthcare, where data consistency is extremely important, we might choose this kind of communication despite the disadvantages.
Another kind is asynchronous replication, wherein the leader communicates with follower databases asynchronously to ensure changes are replicated. This method could be used in social media applications, where speed of response is extremely important.
Another popular way of scaling is called sharding. This involves splitting the database into shards across multiple database servers. A word of caution with sharding: we want to avoid having a database hotspot, or a database server that becomes more frequently accessed than others. This could create an overload on that server.
Another problem arises when we use sharding without replication. In this case, if one of the servers goes down, we will have an incomplete database. This creates a single point of failure: if one system goes down, our entire system is not usable.